Good day , I'm Norman Wildberger. Today, I
want to have a look at how the series so far
on the foundations of mathematics impacts on
mathematics education, especially in primary
school. I thought it would be useful to
outline the area roughly, what the main
subjects in mathematics are for K-12 education,
which is primary and high school education. So,
roughly, there are four main topics: arithmetic,
geometry, algebra, and analysis, and these roughly
are in order both of importance and in order
of historical development. Basic arithmetic
has been around for much longer than any of the
other subjects, and it's also the most important
subject practically. Geometry has been around for
five to ten thousand years. It's historically also
very important and lays the foundation for much
of modern technology. Algebra is around about
a thousand years old and, of course, it links
closely with geometry and arithmetic. Analysis is
more modern, starting three or four hundred years
ago, and it also has many important applications.
Okay, so within arithmetic we have topics: natural
numbers, integers, fractions, and decimals. We
can expect to cover those topics within the
high school curriculum and underline them in
primary school. Geometry is a bigger subject in
arithmetic, and Euclidean geometry is included:
trigonometry, transformations, and 3D geometry.
I think that trigonometry is actually a primary
school subject, not the classical trigonometry
that you usually learn but rational trigonometry,
which you can hear about in my other series. I'll
talk about that more when Euclidean geometry and
trigonometry are really subjects that ought
to be developed in primary school. In algebra,
we have polynomials and solving equations, which
are primary school topics. We have some elementary
combinatorics and basic number theory, which
perhaps are more at the high school level. In
analysis, we have graphs of functions, which is
definitely a primary school subject, exponential
and logarithmic functions, circular functions,
and integrals and derivatives, which are more high
school and more advanced topics. So this is a very
rough outline of basic mathematics that school
leavers should know. There are some minor topics
that I haven't included like statistics, but they
can be fitted in in various places. So this is a
basis for curriculum for primary and high school.
Now let's think about some basic principles that
can guide us in setting up mathematics education
at the primary and high school levels. I think the
first and most important point is that the content
is king. What you teach is more important than how
you teach it. Put it another way: if a principal
has a choice between hiring one teacher who is
very strong mathematically but whose communication
skills are lacking and another teacher whose
mathematical knowledge is weak but whose
communication skills are very good, my advice
is to go for the former. Go for the mathematics
knowledge at the expense of communication
skills. Also, this is where the role of pure
mathematicians comes in. Pure mathematicians have
to step up to the plate and explain to educators
what it is that they should be teaching. You
can't expect educators to have a good enough
understanding of the whole of mathematics to
be able to say what is important and what is
not and what should come where. That's the job
of pure mathematicians, and I think we overall,
with some exceptions, have been a little bit
lacking in that, and we need to improve our game.
The logical structure should always be visible.
Mathematics is a logical subject. It makes sense,
and students like it when they can see that it
makes sense. So the logical structure should
always be there. Everything should be explained;
there should be reasons for all major results.
In terms of the format of the classroom, I
think the traditional thing is best where
the teacher teaches and the students listen
and solve problems. I think self-discovery,
even if it's guided, can easily end
up being a waste of time. It's hard to
discover mathematics. It's hard to discover the
right way of thinking about mathematics. Okay,
it's much easier if someone tells you what the
right way to think is, and you concentrate your
efforts on understanding that explanation and then
working out problems. That's where the creativity,
that's where the originality of students should
manifest itself: at the level of solving problems.
Calculators and computers are unnecessary
for mathematics education. In some cases,
they are even detrimental. Certainly in primary
school, they play or ought to play no role
whatsoever. Their use is just as a crutch to
replace proper understanding of arithmetic.
Get rid of the calculators. Get your students to
practice arithmetic with pen and paper. That's all
that's required. Elaborate real-life scenarios
are also a waste of time. Although it's nice
to connect with reality, doing so in an elaborate
fashion with long-winded stories that really don't
have a lot of mathematical content is cheating the
students. It's making it look like mathematics is
a nice fuzzy warm subject, but really you're
just not giving them enough mathematics. So
I would avoid that. Often instead, you can get a
lot of mathematical examples within mathematics
itself. That's usually the best place to look
for examples. And finally, I think it's good for
students to maintain contact with the historical
development of mathematics. There's a lot of
interesting history in mathematics, and it's
fascinating for students if it's presented well.
Those are just some opinions that I have that
might guide you a little bit in terms of how to
set up mathematics curriculum. Now, let's have a
look at how arithmetic, as we've developed it so
far, affects primary school education. First
of all, you'll know by now that I think that
numbers should be introduced as one stroke
and strings of ones. This is the natural and
historical way of thinking about numbers. Then
after that, one should go to the Roman numeral
way of thinking about numbers, not for very long
but just to introduce it. And then after that,
the Hindu-Arabic notational system, which we
all use. But there should be this progression
in complexity, and students should really realize
that it's really this number as a string of ones
which is the fundamental concept. The Hindu-Arabic
notation just gives us names for those numbers.
The laws of arithmetic should be explained and
then practiced. It is very, very important that
all students get a lot of practice with the laws
of arithmetic. Most weaknesses in mathematics,
even at the university level, have their roots
in not enough training in basic arithmetic.
Subtraction and division should be introduced
via natural numbers. One should not introduce the
integers or the fractions first. The natural place
to introduce those operations is at the level of
natural numbers. Basic number theory provides us
with a lot of nice examples for things to count:
primes, squares, triangular numbers, and many
other things that we'll talk about. They are
a good source of examples for arithmetic. And
finally, the most important subject in primary
school education in mathematics is fractions.
Okay, we haven't gotten to fractions yet,
but one should keep that in mind as the
main goal. If students can get out of
primary school with a good understanding of
fractions, then the program has been a success.
Next time, we're going to talk about the
single most important development in all
of mathematical and even scientific history.
It's influenced dramatically our civilization,
all aspects of our civilization. It's
the Hindu-Arabic number system. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
Let me know if you need any further assistance!